---
draft: true
---

# Experiences

Each experience has a approximate date when I had it, or first started
experiencing it if it is recurring.  The order of the experiences roughly
corresponds to the impact they have/had on my life.


## Working in Water Treatment lab (Prof. Mark Benjamin) - 2013


## Working in EE Building as Tech Support - 


## Working in Pfaentner lab - 2015


## Working at Arzeda - 2/2016

Saw ad for job on Hyak (UW Supercomputer) mailing list, which I was on since I
used Hyak for Pfaentner lab research.  Sounded awesome, so I responded with my
resume and low expectations.  Got call back from Andrew Ban, who very excitedly
explained what I'd be working on (pathway design).  Went in for interview with
Alex Zanghellini and Andrew after reading the Diels-Alderase paper and maybe
skimming some others.  I remember not realizing in the moment that enzymes not
only reduce entropy for reaction by arranging atoms in right places, but also
interacting with the atoms using their amino acid residue sidechains.  Was super
exited to get the job!  Started working two afternoons a week with Michael
Galdzicki and Rudesh Toofanny, mostly with Mike at first.  

## Spiderman: Into the Spider-Verse - 7/2019

Great story, cool themes about family and parenting.  Also about self discovery.
Quintessential all-ages kind of film.


## Inside Out - 2015

I loved the modelling of the mind as a collection of different emotions
competing for control.  Really made me get invested with the main character, and
made me cry when things started going poorly for her at one point.  Discussion
this movie might be a good way to connect with people that are otherwise fairly
different.  


## The Matrix - 2008?

Watched with Dad after being told that it would be very hard to understand.
Turned out that wasn't true for either of us.

Excellent sci-fi, where sci-fi is defined as a medium that explores how new
plausible technologies would affect the world.  Action/style was very compelling
to.  Favorite movie for many years, perhaps even still in some ways.

I think the sequels are pretty good, unlike many others.


## Magic: The Gathering - 2015

First experience was "that complex card game that older kids played" when I was
very young.  Faintly remember that I specifically thought the lands were
really cool, have specific memory of the plains.  

Started playing first from David Lin's cube (a collection of cards you can draft
decks from and then play each other in a tournament style).  Was pretty
intense/overwhelming at first, but in a good way.  


## Agricola - 2015

## 
