# Food Goals

1. Delay chronic diseases as long as possible.  Described well in [this talk by
   Peter Attia](https://vimeo.com/228845024).  The
   [big](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/leading-causes-of-death.htm)
   (linked!) ones are:
   1. Cardiovascular disease.
   1. Cancer.
   1. Neurodegenerative disease.
   1. Diabetes/Metabolic Syndrome.
1. Maintain sustained energy levels as much as possible, avoiding:
   1. Periods of low motivation.
   1. "Food coma-ing".
   1. "Snack train-ing", or continuous distraction by a desire to eat more.

# What should I eat and when?

The most convincing diet structure I've found has been [The Longevity Diet by
Valter Longo](https://www.valterlongo.com/daily-longevity-diet-for-adults/).
This diet is mostly vegan, with fish 2-3 times per week, keeping protein intake
low.

There are a couple of amendments I've made based on my personal experience (in
service of goal 2 above).  These include:

 1. Not eating breakfast.  I find myself most productive in a fasted state
    (even a [prolonged fast](/docs/eating/fasting.md), and eating breakfast breaks be
    right out of this in what otherwise would be a very productive time.  
      - This is counter to Longo's suggestions, some other research on
        circadian rhythms by [Sachin
        Panda](https://doi.org/10.1177/0748730419892105), and the [American
        Heart
        Association](https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000476).
        The arguments here often revolve around weight loss (which I don't have
        a problem with yet), and don't seem too strong to me.
      - This does help keep a shorter eating window on my day which
        is widely recommended:
          - [Sachin Panda](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2019.11.004)
 1. Trying to eat grains and/or starchy foods later in the day.  These foods
    uniquely mess with my energy levels.  I'm eager to get some Continuous
    Glucose Monitoring (CGM) data to see if I can quantitate this.  

Other tenants I try to live by:
 1. Eating whole foods as much as possible.

## My Current Food Strategy

### First Meal: ~11:30am

 - Leafy greens (cabbage, kale, collard greens, salad mix, spinach).
 - Extra virgin olive oil (a lot of it).
 - Onions, carrots, garlic, celery, bell pepper
 - Avocado
 - Walnuts, pecans, almonds
 - Nutritional yeast
 - Salt/spices/vinegar/soy sauce/etc.

This usually manifests as a large salad or stir fry.

### Second Meal: ~6 to 8pm

I try to exercise in some way daily when I have a lull in my energy levels or
focus in the afternoon.  Then I shower and eat around an hour later.

 - Peanut butter
 - More leafy greens
 - Oatmeal
 - Potatoes
 - Oily fish (sardines, salmon)
 - More nuts
 - More olive oil or coconut oil
 - Popcorn
   - This food is uniquely good at starting a "snack train" for some reason.
 - Beans (chickpeas, pinto, etc.)
   - Eating too many destroys my energy level unfortunately : (.

### Things I try to avoid

 - Eggs
 - Dairy
 - Meat
 - Refined carbs (e.g. flour containing foods)
    - [Danger of Fast
       Carbs](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/03/carbs-are-killing-us/609040/)
 - Sugars/Syrups

In practice I may have small amounts (<1 "serving") of these things about once
a week.

Note also that avoiding animals products is partially for health reasons
(avoiding cancer primarily), but also partially because the animal food
industry is not easy for me to support.


# Fasting

One of the big takeaways I've gotten from my readings so far is that spending a
good amount of time in a "fasted" or food deprived state is good for many
reasons.  I therefore try to eat when I'm hungry (not bored) within a shorter
period of the day.  I've also [had good success with prolonged
fasting](/docs/eating/fasting.md).


# Good Resources on Diet

## [In Defense of Food by Michael Pollan](https://michaelpollan.com/books/in-defense-of-food/)

I highly recommend this book!  The biggest takeaway I got from it is that our
tendency to break down foods and biology in general into atomic
nutrients/aspects and pretend that is all they are (for easier study) leads
often to bad models of reality.  Biological systems are highly interwoven and
the impact of stuff on them often depends on the greater context.  For example,
our body's ability to absorb certain nutrients depends on what those nutrients
are dissolved/complexed within.  

## [The Queen of Fats by Susan Allport](http://www.susanallport.com/)

Really interesting read about the science of omega-3 fatty acids.  One of the
core thesis is that our western diet has a higher-than-historical ratio of
omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids, which causes problems.  This is because the
body can use these fats for the same purposes, but they have different
performances for those purposes.  For example,
[prostaglandins](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prostaglandin) can be made with
omega-3 or omega-6 fatty acids, but the omega-3 variants are less "strong" and
may contribute less to heart disease.

Does a really excellent job of telling the story of the scientists who
study/studied these fats, instead of just passing down diet rules without
context.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fatty_acid_ratio_in_food has some data about
omega-3/omega-6 ratios.

## [How Not to Die by Michael Gregor](https://nutritionfacts.org/book/how-not-to-die/)

This book is a good survey of diet from the "Whole Food Plant Based"
perspective.  Sometimes I think the author gets a bit over-zealous about how
his philosophy is the best and makes lazy, broad, strong statements that are
not adequately supported.  For instance, dismissing certain foods (like meat)
as obviously unhealthy without examining the counterpoints.

The author's web site [nutritionfacts.org](https://nutritionfacts.org/) is a
decent source of information, though it suffers from the same problems as the
book.

## [Genius Foods by Max Lugavere](https://www.maxlugavere.com/book)

This book takes a more brain focused approach to diet, which pushes it more
into the keto- space.  AFAIK, ketogenic diets are more linked to brain health
than other diets.  I think it falls into the same trap as Michael Gregor, but
not quite as badly.  It's a good intro to lots of cool food/health topics to
explore more independently.  
