---
backlinks-set: 
categories-set: #{"Society"}
---
# Solving Societal Problems

Here I'm defining a "societal problem" as a large problem facing many people
that could be solved if said people changed their behavior in some systematic
way. For example:

 - **Climate Change** could be solved if we all transitioned to using more
   renewable sources of energy.
 - The **Obesity Epidemic** could be solved if we all ate less food.

## Individual Change and Shaming

One common proposal I've heard for solving at least the above problems is using
a "grassroots" approach. This method would involve first changing your own
behavior such that the problem would be solved if everyone behaved like you,
then trying to influence others to adopt your new behavior(s). This seems
simple enough, but I don't think it's the best way forward, and in some ways is
actively harmful.

The tacit assumption with this proposal is that people are able to choose what
behaviors to adopt. I would argue that in fact our behaviors are much more
influenced by our environment than we would like to admit. One component of our
environment is indeed other people peer pressuring us, but (IMO) far more
dominant factors include:

 - Economics (how much the behavior change costs)
 - "At hand"-ness (what other behaviors are "at hand" and easy to do)

When these factors are overpowering (which I argue they usually are), peer
pressure becomes a form of bullying and social rejection that the target of
which is powerless to stop. Perpetuating this is downright cruel.

## Changing the Environment

If a grassroots behavior change movement isn't the best way to solve the
problem, then what can we do instead?  In my opinion, the answer is
environmental change. This can take several forms:

### 1. Local Environmental Change

This involves making changes to an individual's local environment (the spaces
they interact with on a habitual basis) to guide them to certain behaviors.
Some examples would be intentionally not buying unhealthy food when at the
grocery store so that when at home these foods are not "at hand". Or not buying
a car so that you instead need to bike or bus to get around.

Note that the line here can be pretty blurry between what is an actual behavior
change and what is simply an action that changes one's environment. Because of
this, I think the stronger, ultimate solution is:

### 2. Policy-Level Environmental Change

Government policies can create massive environmental changes. For example,
extra taxes on certain products can massively impact people's buying decisions.
Or bans of certain products can completely change the suite of chemicals that
individuals are exposed to on a daily basis.

A natural objection is to point out that in a democracy, the majority of people
(in theory) choose what policies are enacted. Because of this, wouldn't people
just vote for policies that help them perpetuate their current behavior set -
which they presumably "chose" and/or otherwise would like to keep?

I argue that actually **people are quite able to vote in a way counter to their
everyday actions**. For instance, people who enjoy soda may vote for a
sugar-sweetened beverage tax. The reason why (I think) this is because the
mental state you adopt when voting is generally different that the mental state
when deciding - or not consciously deciding at all - to engage in a particular
behavior.

This is especially true when voting on higher level, more abstract policies.
For instance, banning a certain type of energy production might indirectly
increase someone's cost of living by quite a bit in various ways, but thinking
about the policy in a more abstract sense may lead someone to approve it
despite this personal impact.

Based on my own emotions, I also think that people by and large care deeply
about how their lives compare to those of others around them.  A tax that
greatly increases everyone's cost of living is much more bearable than one that
targets just an individual person. It's much rarer for people to worry about
their absolute standing than how they compare to others - the fact that the
majority of people today live like the elites of a couple centuries ago is not
a great source of comfort and satisfaction generally speaking.

This, like many solutions to big problems, does depend on an educated populace
that is able to reason about the effects of certain policies. Ensuring this
condition is itself a large scale societal problem that hopefully can be solved
with this same line of thinking. I do admit there's a bit of a chicken-and-egg
problem here :/.

#### Nudging

The book [Nudge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nudge_(book)) explores one
philosophy with which good policies can be crafted without impinging too much on
individual liberty.

#### Externality-based Policies

Many societal problems are due to hard-to-track externalities of existing
behaviors that are not "priced in" to the cost of the behavior. For instance,
companies that make unhealthy food do not pay for the healthcare costs their
products incur. Or single-use plastic producers do not pay for waste cleanup
efforts. Or petroleum refiners do not pay for CO2 emissions. If these
externalities were priced in, then the consumer would have a much easier time
making buying decisions, as the real cost of their consumption would be obvious
to them.

Currently, it's hard to know the real cost of a given behavior, which is
further confused by emotional arguments on either side. For example, if you
want to know if you should use plastic straws or not, the low price of them
might make you think they are an efficient way to solve your problem. But
others would argue that [some large number] of straws are used every second!
Unfortunately, that doesn't really tell you very much. If instead it cost a
dollar to clean up every discarded straw, and that was priced into the straws
cost since the producing company had to clean up the straws, then you as the
consumer could make a more informed decision about whether that dollar is worth
it.

Of course, tracking all these externalities is hard. But this seems like a
useful framework, or at least more useful that trying to get consumers to all
individually understand the externalities of their actions.

Probably someone else somewhere has done a much better job exploring this
topic.

### 3. Technological Environmental Change

New technologies dramatically change the environment people live in.
Interestingly, they usually do this without requiring the bureaucracy required
to enact government policies. Therefore, the development of new technologies to
solve societal problems, like geoengineering techniques for climate change,
has a lot of potential. And some problems can **only** be solved with new
technologies (like preventing aging).

### 4. Cultural Environmental Change

Shifting cultural norms also can lead to massive change in individual behavior.
I don't really know the best way this can be leveraged without the "grassroots"
problem I mentioned above, but I thought it would be worth mentioning.

## Personal Impact

Given this theory, if someone feels strongly that certain problems need to be
solves, what should they do?

Influencing government policy is a lot of work and is, I would argue, a task
that requires specialized skills. This means that someone who invests more time
in building these skills will hone them, and have more leverage when applying
them. Therefore, an effective path to personally solving societal problems is
to invest a lot of time and energy in honing and applying these skills. Note
that I'm not talking about lobbying here, but rather actually writing laws and
doing the research that motivates their creation and design. This kind of
environment building can also be done outside of formal government in private
organizations that fill some roles that a government might otherwise fill.

Our hypothetical person could also get deep into creating a technology that
solves the problem they care about. This arguably takes even more time/energy
investment to see significant returns.

For those who do not want to, or cannot, invest time/energy in influencing
policy or developing new technologies, one fallback option is to instead hone
another set of skills, apply them to make money, and then fund
policymakers/inventors with the proceeds. This will probably have a bigger
impact than dabbling in invention/policymaking, and certainly will have a
bigger impact than just changing your own behavior.

Regardless, being a [creative optimist (as opposed to a destructive
pessimist)]({{< relref "/docs/mind/optimism.md" >}}) is important.

### Hypocrisy

If you assume that "grassroots" individual change has little to no impact on
societal problems, then a lot of seemly hypocritical behavior is explained and
even excused. For instance, it is very reasonable to believe strongly that
society would be better if everyone was vegan, while eating the readily
available non-vegan foods provided by society. It even makes some sense that
someone super passionate about some political issue - to the point where they
organize protests or voting campaigns - may not vote for the issue themselves!
In my opinion, these behaviors are more a demonstration of how these
hypothetical people think they can manifest change as opposed to what they
truly believe.

## Testing this Theory

Right now this line of thinking is just a plausible (at least to me) idea.  I
would love to see some evidence for this, but don't have any at hand right now
to cite.  So (as always) I might be totally wrong :).