# States of Mind

These states can be mixed together, but are at their strongest when the mind is
fully focused on one at a time.


## Professing - Performing - A State of Action

In this state, the information already contained in your neural patterns is
simply being projected as is into the world onto some medium.  This could be
into the air as speech, onto paper as writing, or into your body as any physical
activity (e.g. dancing, biking, etc.).  In this model, pure professing involves
no self reflection or change whatsoever.  If there is adaptation to the
unpredictable physical world, it is through if/then branches that choose simply
between already constructed neural patterns.  

Being in this state requires some combination of practice or training to build
the mental patterns, and a framework of assumptions that keeps the mind from
examining what it is doing too closely.  

In the extreme, pure profession can be animalistic and stubborn. Being in a 
professing state leads to confidence and strong ego.

### Flow

Being in a strong professing state can lead to a "flow" state, where the world
is continually validating your stored patterns and it feels like everything is
going "right".  I believe this state enables the acts of greatest skill or
talent that are possible for people.


## Absorbing - Learning - A State of Observation

In counter to profession, a state of absorption occurs when a mind is focused
instead on taking in new information while making few/no assumptions about the
world.  In this state, instead of continually acting, one continually
questions, expanding the problem space without looking at its details.  This
happens often when being exposed to new information or questioning assumptions
one has about old information.  New mental connections and memories are being
created actively in this state.

When in this state, a mind is very sensitive to any external feedback to
correct its action.  This can manifest as insecurity or anxiety if pressure is
applied during this state of mind.

This state of mind can be paralyzing, as it lays bare the overwhelming
complexity of everything as you continue to zoom out.  However, it also leads to
interesting connections that you may not see otherwise.

Extreme absorption/mindfulness can lead to analysis paralysis or meaningless
theorizing that is too far removed from reality to be useful.  

### Learning (WIP section)

The brain only understands the world as it perceives it through the senses.
Although the senses can take in a high volume of information, there is still
heavy processing that must be done for this information to be useful/actionable
by the rest of the brain.  There are many points along this chain of processing
where learned perspective shapes what the rest of the brain sees.  For instance,
an image of an engine may just look like metal to an untrained brain, but tells
a very different story to a mechanic.  

In a way, learning or training is just the process of acquiring new perspectives
from which to see the world.  This explains why learning can be such a "stop and
go" process - it's easy to be stuck on a concept for a while before it finally
clicks.  

- [Inversion by James Clear](https://jamesclear.com/inversion)
  - Imagining how to avoid failure is often more useful than imagining how to
    succeed.

Taking breaks helps your brain finish processing and solidify skills.  See
[this Skyline video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JLloQvOv1W4) for a
description about how this process works for a game like Overwatch
specifically.


## Personal Growth

In order to get better at something, both absorbing AND professing are equally
important often in alternating steps.  


## Ideas to test

 - Do you actually have a worse memory for events that happened to you when in
   a professing state?

# Focus

This is unrelated to the above states of mind.  

One way I think of focus is as getting buy in from your mind to fully engage in
some work (mental or physical).  Often the mind expects some pay off for doing
this, since it takes energy and time to be fully engaged.  [This
snippet](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ryB_VQ__KeE) by Jonathan Blow does a
great job describing how focus can be disrupted ([full
interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Ej_3NKA3pk)).
