# Creativity

## Constraining the Problem Space

One of the main enemies of creative work getting done is the "blank page" - the
mental state of staring at a blank page and being paralyzed either with too
many thoughts or no thoughts.  One useful tool to avoid this is by constraining
your problem space, sometimes dramatically.  For instance, what if you could
only fold the page and do nothing else?  Suddenly, it's much easier (for me at
least) to start just doing something. This helps a lot with "Just Getting
Started".

Constraining the problem space could also involve setting a hard deadline for
finishing X in 30-60mins.  This will often introduce an urgency that can help
produce something.

Another idea along these lines is to intentionally try to come up with the
dumbest solution/idea and start implementing it. Since you are intentionally
trying to do a bad job, all the thinking and anxiety that comes when trying to
do stuff right is removed, which may facilitate doing something which can later
be polished.

## Just Getting Started

Once you get on the path of creation, the small choices you encounter will
generally be much more manageable decisions, and through them something complex
often emerges.

## Remixing

Our minds create new things by mixing the old together.  A classic examination
of this is [Everything is a
Remix](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nJPERZDfyWc).

A corollary of this idea is that to be creative it's helpful to expose yourself
to many other ideas.  In my opinion, art in any form is spectacularly useful
here. One way to think about art is as an expression of (hopefully new) ideas
specifically designed to appeal to human sensibilities - the perfect coupling
of novelty with a mechanism to get it to stick in your head. Art is also great
at encouraging engagement with the world, especially new parts of it.

## Vision and Confidence

Being "Determinant" as described by Peter Thiel in [You Are Not a
Lottery](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iZM_JmZdqCw) may help with this.

### Being Unreasonable

One (unpolished) thought I've had is that being "unreasonable" could help with
creativity. By unreasonable, I mean **not** considering all possibilities,
ignoring objectively better optimizations, and ignoring people's good opinions
when in the process of creating. I've found for myself that, although this
consideration in theory makes for a better end result, it can fracture the
strong focus on a vision that is required to make something at all. Or it can
warp the vision into something that is "better", but actually different to the
point where the original vision is unfulfilled in some way.


## See Also

 - [My thoughts on game development]({{< relref
   "/docs/gamedev/gamedev-context.md" >}}), which play with a lot of these
   ideas.
 - [Cool test](https://www.datcreativity.com/)
 - [Guided idea generation tool](https://old.tjcx.me/tools/idea-generator.html)

Categories: [Mind]({{< relref "/docs/all.md" >}}?Mind=true)