# How to Do Hard Tasks

This goes hand-in-hand with [motivation]({{< relref "/docs/mind/motivation.md" >}}).

https://every.to/superorganizers/how-to-do-hard-things is somewhat related.

## What Makes Tasks Hard?

Tasks are hard when you don't already have pathways in your brain that script
them, or your existing pathways are incomplete.  Doing hard tasks requires
learning.

http://gregorygundersen.com/blog/2020/01/12/why-research-blog/

One way to model a task is as a tree of possibilities, where each node is a
decision with any number of possible outcomes. Here I'll discuss tasks that are
hand because this tree is complex (has many nodes). Tasks can be hard for other
reasons (e.g. physically hard), but I wont discuss those here.

Task trees can have many nodes because:

1. There simply are many steps to take to complete the task,
1. Because some steps in the process are committing, making it so that you need
   to try to predict a lot of the future decisions that will come up in order to
   be confident in your decision (like playing a game of chess),


## What Makes Tasks Easy?

Tasks are easy when a pathway has already been constructed in your head to
execute that task effectively (traverse the tree of decisions in a
predetermined way).

It's good to be cautious of tasks that you find to be easy.  In my experience
it's a human tendency to strongly defend the solutions to the tasks that one
holds (see [a reddit post about political
beliefs](https://www.reddit.com/r/dataisbeautiful/comments/iu865f/oc_i_did_some_presidential_economic_statistics_to/g5k93df/)
and Claire's old lab's observation that ideas/theories can become "precious"
once created).  This makes sense, since it takes effort/time/resources to
create a task-solving pathway.  See also David Eagleman's neuroscience books,
which talk about this.  However, this strong defense can blind one to obvious
flaws or much better pathways.  It's probably a good habit to occasionally
re-learn from scratch originally hard tasks that are important to do well.


## Hard Task Solving Strategies - How to Learn

Learning requires active exploration of the real world task tree for the task
you want to learn to do.  Through this exploration, the tree is transcribed
from the real world into mental pathways.  So one way to think about learning
hard tasks is learning how to most efficiently explore/transcribe the task
tree.


### Questions

Some parts of the task tree may already exist in your brain from another task
you've done - for example, most of the muscle movement mental pathways needed
to run already exist in someone who knows how to walk.  Other parts may be
completely new, or even contradictory to existing mental pathways.  A very
efficient way to more quickly learn these alien pathways is to question them
via:

 - Asking a task expert
 - Asking a reference (e.g. A book or Google search)
 - Tinkering with the task space (e.g. Attempting to run some computer code)


### Environmental Influence

The human brain constantly absorbs new information from its perspective on the
environment where it is.
For learning therefore, it can be helpful to place oneself in an environment
conducive to learning what you want to learn.  This usually makes it more
obvious what questions to ask to further map out the task space.

https://github.com/matthiasn/talk-transcripts/blob/master/Hickey_Rich/HammockDrivenDev.md

https://blog.jim-nielsen.com/2022/what-work-looks-like/


### Depth First Search of Task Tree

Perhaps a preference of iNtuitive Myers-Briggs personalities, this can lead to
fast good solutions, but also blindness to obvious other paths.


### Breath First Search of Task Tree

Perhaps a habit of Sensing Myers-Briggs personalities, this can lead to good
scoping of the task space, but may exhaust energy to "go deep" on a specific
task solution.

I think this is what Nassim Taleb advocates for doing more in complex task
space.  He writes that exposing oneself to many decision points and giving
oneself the option to travel will long term find one the most success.


### Mental Perspective

The brain only understands the world as it perceives it through the senses.
Although the senses can take in a high volume of information, there is still
heavy processing that must be done for this information to be useful/actionable
by the rest of the brain.  There are many points along this chain of processing
where learned perspective shapes what the rest of the brain sees.  For instance,
an image of an engine may just look like metal to an untrained brain, but tells
a very different story to a mechanic.

In a way, learning or training is partially (or completely?) the process of
acquiring new perspectives from which to see the world.  This explains why
learning can be such a "stop and go" process - it's easy to be stuck on a
concept for a while before it finally clicks.

- [Inversion by James Clear](https://jamesclear.com/inversion)
  - Imagining how to avoid failure is often more useful than imagining how to
    succeed.

Categories:
[Mind]({{< relref "/" >}}?Mind=true)

Backlinks:
[Motivation]({{< relref "/docs/mind/motivation.md" >}})