# Motivation

NOTE This is a random theory of mine; don't put too much stock into it!

Motivation to do something requires that the "something" is **attainable**
and **meaningful** (has a point/purpose).

## (Perceived) Attainability

Objectives that are *perceived* - which is really all that matters with respect
to motivation - to be attainable have a trivially easy to accomplish next step
on the path toward them.

What makes a next step trivially easy?  If your body/mind are primed to do the
task such that you could do it with minimal/no conscious intervention.  For
example walking, reading, or doing some trained skill are trivially easy.  Note
that this depends on the current state of your body; walking may not be
trivially easy if you are exhausted or have a broken leg.  And also the state
of your mind; responding to a conversation may be hard if you haven't caught up
on what has been said.

Note that the whole path to the objective does not have to be trivially easy or
even known.  All that matters where motivation is concerned is the next step
(at least for attainability).

Motivation can flag when the next step towards a goal is unclear.  In such
situations it's easy to simply switch gears to another activity which has clear
steps - this is procrastination.

### How to make things attainable

When something feels unattainable because either (a) it seems so hard you would
fail if you tried or (b) its unclear what step to take next, I have found
several tricks that work pretty well:

#### Thinking Creatively

See [thoughts on creativity]({{< relref "/docs/mind/creativity.md" >}}).

#### Taking a Step Back

Taking a step back both from the problem at hand AND from anything else that
engages your mind.  The goal here is to put yourself in a state of boredom, then
slightly nudge your thoughts toward your issue.  Often I find my mind much more
eagerly thinks about something when the prospect of boredom is there as an
alternative.  One way to do this is by going and sitting in another chair far
from distractions.

Another alternative is going for a walk or run, preferably with no audio or
other distractions.  This method also usually engages my creativity, which
helps open up new potential paths to issue resolution.  There is the drawback
that sometimes here my creativity will wander, and I will end up with good
ideas about something other than my issue.

#### Talking it Out

Talk to someone (or yourself) about the issue.  Sometimes the act of putting
your issue into works can snap some clarity into it.  The person you are
talking to may also offer useful insights.  Writing thoughts down can also
sometimes work here, if no-one is available to talk to.

This usually involves re-verifying the assumptions you've been making about the
problem.

#### Getting Psyched Up

This only applies when you find the task hard, but you see the path you would
take to do it.  In this case, for me listening to energetic music or putting
myself in an energetic, stimulating, or even stressful environment (e.g. with
other people around) can help me feel more active and therefore more able to do
my hard task.  I think part of this is that the stimulation occupies the higher
level part of my mind that's telling me the task is hard, and just lets the less
conscious parts of me simply execute. Again, this only works for a case (a)
above, **not** when it's unclear what to do next.  See the book "Antifragile"
for more on this, specifically Book 1 Chapter 2.

#### Making Concrete Sub-Tasks

One highly effective way to keep something consistently attainable is to break
it into smaller, concrete pieces that are each attainable even to a tired or
distracted mind. The actual act of doing this can be very difficult, so this
isn't a great solution when you are already finding your motivation flagging.
This strategy shines when you let your past self do this for you when it is
energized and fresh. Of course, your past self wont have the direct motivation
to do this (as it's doing fine) so it helps to set reminders for yourself to do
this work when you are fresh.

#### TODO add a reference to the manifesto "vision" section here, or merge the sections

### How to make things LESS attainable

When stuck on attainability, there are several counterproductive strategies:

**Eating food** in hopes that it will give you energy to push through.  This
always just makes me MORE tired especially in the short term.  Plus I usually
feel more able/energetic when I am slightly hungry.

**Trying to brute force** your way through an issue without trying alternate
routes.  This sometimes works, but usually just makes me feel stupid and can
lead to a vicious cycle where I continually burn more and more energy in less
and less well directed ways trying to prove I am not stupid :).  The key to
avoiding this is making sure you aren't following the same lines of thought
over and over, and stopping if you find yourself doing so.

The tendency to try to brute force I find is more and more temping the most
tired you are.  One way to explain this is that as you do something hard (that
you don't already have mental circuits to handle) , your mind contracts/focuses
on the problem until it becomes so rigid that even the slightest unexpected
event (or new solution idea) is hard to handle.  This is counter to an
"expanded" mind where many possibilities are open and easy to handle.  If you
have been focusing hard on one thing, a way to expand your mind is to do
something you might find boring and let your mind wander its way to expansion.
As discussed earlier, going for a walk or otherwise exercising I find hastens
this process.  So going for a walk with no stimulation (no reading on phone, no
listening to anything, no conversations with people) is a great technique.
Some of this is inspired by the last part of Chapter 5 of "How to Change Your
Mind" by Michael Pollan.


## (Perceived) Meaning

Activities are meaningful when they fit neatly into a larger narrative.  This
could be a grand narrative about one's identity (e.g. defined by what [virtues
you aspire to or possess](https://www.viacharacter.org/character-strengths)),
or a myopic narrative about what puzzle piece should fit next into the puzzle
to bring it closer to solution.

What you or others may find meaningful in a certain situation varies a lot for
many reasons.  I have found myself obsessed with completing certain goals, and
then having my obsession and motivation completely evaporate after reframing
the larger context those goals fit into.

One way to lose motivation for a task is to follow the meaning of the task up
through all the ways it impacts the world, coming to the final conclusion that
there is no greater meaning in the world (or you don't know what it is), and
therefore the task itself is meaningless.  This kind of "bubbling up" can
happen on a smaller scale as well.

TODO explore ideas from
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/we-learn-faster-when-we-arent-told-what-choices-to-make/

There are many sources of meaning (just see the above linked virtues list). Some
of the sources that are strong for me personally:

1. Proving competence. This involves demonstrating to myself and others that I
   can overcome difficult challenges. What the challenge actually is isn't
   really that important, only that I can succeed at it where others (including
   my past self) fail.


## Holding loosely and Ego

Becoming highly personally invested in a task often surfaces a lot of
paralyzing emotions like fear of failure. Even for work that could be
life-changing, I find "holding loosely" or not caring too much about the
outcome is a highly effective strategy.  This frees your mind up to perform in
the moment, which will often be what determines the ultimate result of the
work.

This mindset avoids the problem of focusing on things not in your control
(explored in [this gamedev post about
SNKRX](https://www.a327ex.com/posts/snkrx_log/#control)). By definition, this
thinking can't directly lead to positive action that would improve your
situation. The best it can do is _maybe_ make you stumble upon some new
information if you are doing research about the thing not in your control, but
much more often I find that it leads to dead-end thoughts that make you lose
motivation entirely.

I found this concept to be extremely helpful when interviewing for jobs. Here
this is particularly relevant because interviewing involves being social with
your interviewer, and having a positive social interaction usually requires
sharing positive emotions.  It's much easier to do this if you are actually
feeling these emotions, and not faking them while internally feeling fear or
panic.

This concept is really helpful in sports too, or anything that requires high
in-the-moment performance.  In fact, I was first introduced to this concept
when playing tennis.  I was taught to hold my racket like a tube of toothpaste -
if I squeezed too hard (get too tense), the toothpaste would come out.  This
relaxed physical state is tightly coupled to a relaxed mental state of being
"in the moment".

One great exploration of this is the concept of "effortless effort" in Zen
philosophy.  I was first introduced to this by the book [Zen in the Martial
Arts by Joe
Hyams](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/424340.Zen_in_the_Martial_Arts).
There are also some good thoughts about this in [Zen Mind, Beginners Mind by
Shunryu Suzuki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zen_Mind,_Beginner%27s_Mind).

See [my thoughts on creativity]({{< relref "/docs/mind/creativity.md" >}}) for
more exploration of related ideas.

## Expectations

For me, the hardest part of executing on goals is getting my entire brain on
board to apply effort towards my current goal.  The best way I've found to do
this so far is by keeping the quality of the final product out of my head.  In
other words, I try to not have expectations for a specific result or, if that's
too hard, I at least try to keep my expectations low.

Not worrying about my goal's final product makes it much easier to just start
doing something.  My ego is protected from failure, and I can utilize all the
parts of my brain that live in the moment.  Usually, the best final products
are honed as they are made anyway - attempting to plan out the perfect product
from the start without getting feedback from the work often just leads me to a
state of analysis paralysis.

The expectations of others are often even more extreme of a factor than my own
expectations. For example, if I am given a task (or collaboratively come up
with a task) that is perceived as very difficult or impossible, any progress at
all will make me extremely motivated to continue. Conversely, if a task is seen
as trivial to accomplish, I may not be motivated to start right away or, worse,
I will feel very stressed if it ends up taking longer than expected.

## Execution

Some great resources for goal execution:

 - https://waitbutwhy.com/2015/03/procrastination-matrix.html
 - https://jamesclear.com/atomic-habits

## See Also

 - https://guzey.com/productivity/
 - http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/productivity
 - Meditation to help when getting overwhelmed:
   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i7kh8pNRWOo
 - Work specific motivation: https://jasont.co/ennui/











Categories: [Mind]({{< relref "/" >}}?Mind=true)

Backlinks: [Manifesto]({{< relref "/docs/manifesto/" >}}), 
[How To Do Hard Tasks]({{< relref "/docs/mind/how-to-do-hard-tasks/" >}}), 
