# How to Work With Others

Everyone you are working with will have a model in their heads that describes
their best solution to the problem at hand.  Everyone involved must take their
models out of their heads so that others can amend their own models in an
effort to reach some kind of consensus.  This is hard work and is not always
treated as such.

Not only is it hard work to do this model-sharing, but it can create [cognitive
dissonance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_dissonance), which causes
pain.  This can necessitate further model-sharing to resolve, which can balloon
a small issue into a massive ordeal.  I like this quote from Valarie Kaur:

   "Deep listening is an act of surrender. We risk being changed by what we hear."

To expect people to readily do this is in my opinion expecting too much.  Of
course, putting effort into this process is necessary for many types of work;
lots of problems arise when someone is not willing to *ever* do this.

This article does a good job of providing a methodology for resolving friction
around model-sharing:

https://medium.dave-bailey.com/how-to-resolve-a-conflict-when-both-sides-are-right-1f375bc82f7f


## Emotional Consensus and Disagreement {#emotional-conversations}

People are very sensitive to emotions of others (accurately understood or not)
in conversations. This is especially true of negative emotions. Because of
this, it can very easily become the goal of a conversation to help resolve
negative emotions present in your conversation partner. This can be good, but
can also be a problem if your are mis-reading your partner's emotions or if
they don't want those emotions resolved. I think it's good to be aware of this
tendency and catch yourself if you see issues arising because of it.

Related, one thing I've noticed that sparks involved discussions (or heated
arguments) is lack of **emotional** consensus on a topic. I've had several
talks where it seems like I agree with my conversation partner, but there is
still an unresolved tension in the air. This tension existed because, although
we clarified facts, we still had different emotional reactions to the topic,
implying that we hadn't created a fully shared perspective. Identifying that
this is the root cause of the tension can be a good way to get to the bottom of
the disagreement.


## [Reactance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reactance_(psychology))

People inherently like to be in control of what happens to them in their lives.
When this control is threatened, resistance to the threat is the natural
response. I definitely have felt this when in a situation where someone tells
me to do something - even something I know I want to do. The very fact that I
was told to do it makes me _less_ interested in doing it! Sometimes this effect
can be extreme.

This is one of the reasons why micromanagement of others leads to all sorts of
problems. It is much more motivating to let people come to their own decisions
about whether to do something if possible. 

In my experience, learning is also easier when the topic of study is not
dictated to me, but instead I explore it "freely". Even reading a linear
textbook can feel free (and I absorb the information better) when I set the
pace and am able to jump around at will.

### Circumventing Reactance

Sometimes you still need to tell people what to do to effectively get things
done. For cases where reactance is strong, creating an environment in which a
person can explore and independently come to your conclusion for what needs to
be done may be an effective strategy. This has the added benefit (?) of
allowing them to come to an even better conclusion than your own!


## Assuming Good Intentions

It's pretty hard sometimes to figure out why someone is doing something in
particular.  [This clip from Malcolm in the Middle about changing a light
bulb](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AbSehcT19u0) is a pretty funny extreme
example, but I find this kind of situation comes up in smaller ways fairly
often. If you must have expectations for someone doing something for you (which
are best avoided entirely), it's good to keep in mind that their approach is
probably going to be different from yours in ways that are hard to predict.
Trying to figure it out - or worse, micromanage them - may often be wasted
effort and lead to interpersonal frustration.


## Complaining

People complain for at least two main reasons:

1. They need help with something.  Either via:
    1. Direct help (offloading their problem in part to someone else).
    1. Advice help (having another person help improve their understanding of
       their problem, so that they can solve it alone without transferring any
       responsibility).
    1. In "How to Change your Mind" by Michael Pollan this was described as a
       "doing" behavior.
1. They want to share their feelings so that others around them are on the same
   page about their emotional state.  This is helpful e.g. so others around
   them will not burden them further, unaware of their current burden.  This is
   also helpful for emotional validation reasons - it is useful to know if the
   thing you are upset about upsets others; if not, perhaps you are missing an
   easy resolution to your problem.
    1. In "How to Change your Mind" by Michael Pollan this was described as a
       "being" (in the moment) behavior.

It is easy (at least for me) to jump strait to advice help when people complain
around me and ignore the fact that the complainer may need one of the other
types of resolution described above.
