# Bike Commuting


## Benefits

1. **Exercise**. Moving your body is good for you, especially when regularly
   done. If you have to go to work every day, it makes sense to couple that
   mandatory travel with exercise to make the exercise "mandatory" itself!
1. **Inexpensive**. Especially if you buy cheap bikes, bike commuting might be
   the least expensive way to travel around a city short of walking.
1. **On your own terms**. For me, it's important to be on my own schedule and
   not have to worry about public transportation schedules and parking time
   limits. Biking is not the only way to accomplish this, but it does a good
   job at it.

## Downsides

1. Requires living in an area where everyday needs (work, grocery, etc.) are
   close by. Living in these areas is usually more expensive. This is not
   really a con if you want to live in these areas for other reasons.
1. If you do not have a car, then it can be logistically harder to participate
   in certain activities, which will probably end up with you simply not doing
   them consistently.

## Listening while Biking

I highly recommend listening to audiobooks or podcasts when biking to both be
entertained and maybe learn some stuff or get inspired while you're at it.

I used to do this by putting some large studio-style over-ear headphones over
my *helmet* so that the speakers would not sit on my ears, but rather a couple
inches away from them. This worked pretty well, although it did look kinda
silly.

Since then I've switch to using "bone-conduction" headphones like
[these](https://amzn.to/3j79zfw) (I can't find my originally purchased ones).
In my experience, these just act like tiny speakers that are close to your
ears, but not in them - I don't get much "bone-conduction" effect from my pair.

However you listen when biking, I highly recommend making sure you can still
hear what's going on around you for safety.

## Buying a Bike

I personally recommend buying a cheap, used bike for commuting. There are
several reasons for this:

 - Maintaining an expensive bike's high performance can itself be expensive and
   time consuming, especially if you ride it a lot, which you would be doing if
   you are commuting. A cheaper bike with worse performance will require less
   maintenance to keep it at its current performance level, and you can even
   just let it fall into disrepair and get another cheap bike when it becomes
   unusable. This makes the assumption that performance for commuting is not
   that important (it isn't for me).
 - It's easier to buy multiple bikes if they are cheap, which has several
   benefits:
    - You can try out different styles of bike and/or bikes with different
      features over a longer time window.
    - If one bike has a problem that might take a couple days to resolve (e.g.
      if you are waiting for a part delivery), you still have a bike to use.
 - Bike theft is a real problem, and having a used bike (1) makes your bike a
   less attractive target for thieves and (2) makes any theft that does occur
   less painful. AFAIK no lock perfectly secures your bike, and few/no locks
   secure individual bike components.

In a big city like Seattle, there are a lot of people selling bikes, so they
are usually pretty easy to find. I use [craigslist](https://craigslist.org/)
and [Facebook Marketplace](https://www.facebook.com/marketplace) for this.

## Modifications

### Milk Crate

The best way I've found to transport stuff on a bike is a back rack + milk
crate combo:

![Milk Crate](/docs/lifestyle-optimizations/bike_milk_crate.jpg)

This securely holds things that are just placed in it (like a backpack).
Previously I used straps to secure bags to the bike rack itself, but this is
much easier.  This is also **much** more pleasant than actually wearing a
backpack when biking, especially if you don't want to sweat too much.

## Rainy Weather

One of the worst parts of bike commuting is getting wet on the way in to work
and not being able to dry off.  For me, most of my cloths dry pretty quickly in
the generally light Seattle rain, but my shoes and socks do not. This is
partially because of their relative thickness and also because they are usually
exposed to the most water. Even when it is not actively raining, biking on wet
ground can toss up a good amount of water on- or into my shoes.

I've found the best solution to this problem by far is wearing some kind of
waterproof shoe covers like [these](https://amzn.to/3NvMFMK).

## Maintenance

Most bike maintenance is not that hard to learn, and you will save lots of time
and money in the long run if you learn some basics. Here I list the most common
problems that can be easily addressed DIY. Check out YouTube for good tutorials
if I haven't linked any myself. 

Most repairs require some specialized tools, which are pretty cheap on Amazon
(usually less expensive than having the repair done professionally once).

### Flat Tires

I like to keep a couple tubes (like [this one](https://amzn.to/3qN1r87)) around
for an easy change. I also use patch kits for small punctures.

You'll also need [tire levers](https://amzn.to/3JyEIDg) to remove your tire.

When changing a tube, keep in mind that your tube was damaged by something.
This could be:

 - Something that punctured your tire. Run your hands along the inside of your
   tire near the puncture to make sure that nothing sharp is still embedded in
   your tire!
 - Your tire itself has a hole in it.
 - Your tube folded as it inflated, or was otherwise pinched.

You don't want to change your tube only to have your new tube break for the
same reason!

### Skipping Gears

Sometimes when you bike you may notice skipping when pedaling, especially when
pedaling hard. This is usually quite jarring and in bad cases can make your
bike fairly unridable. This issue can be caused by several different problems:

#### 1. Misaligned Shifters

Your gear shifters may put the chain in between two of the cogs that it wraps
around. To fix this, usually shifters can be shifted around by tighting or
loosening a screw on them.

#### 2. A Stretched Chain

Over time, bike chains stretch.  An overly stretched chain can lead to
skipping, as the distance between the links no longer properly matches the
distances between the teeth on the cog. See
https://www.parktool.com/blog/repair-help/when-to-replace-a-chain-on-a-bicycle
for a good overview of this problem.

#### 3. Worn Cogs

Just like chains can wear out, so can the cogs they wrap around.  This happens
more slowly, and I've heard can be slowed even further by regularly replacing
your chain (presumably stretched chains wear out cogs faster). When a cog is
worn, skipping occurs for the same reason as when a chain is worn - there is a
misfit between the chain and the cog. Cogs can also break teeth, making this
even worse! 

Note when replacing cogs that there are two types, freewheels and cassettes.
It is crucial to know which one you have before attempting a replacement! Check
out these sites for more details:

 - https://www.sheldonbrown.com/free-k7.html
 - https://www.parktool.com/blog/repair-help/determining-cassette-freewheel-type

I've made the mistake before of trying to replace the wrong type of cog, and
it's not fun.

### Stuck Seatpost

I had a very persistent problem for a while of my seatpost being stuck in a
specific position on one of my bikes.  I think the root cause was corrosion
fusing the post to the frame, but am not completely sure.  I tried very hard
for a long time to fix this, as the seat was slightly too high and I suspect
this was causing me [pain in my left
knee](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1a9vPQ6muSLYFzL1YfB7s90kQxWDijXBOpVjZqCm5GEs/edit#heading=h.4aznx89p4bq7).
Eventually, a coworker lent me a [pipe wrench](https://amzn.to/3NpLoGN) and I
bought some [penetrating lube](https://amzn.to/3zgWxFH). These two in tandem
easily loosened my seatpost!

*Note that any links to products on this page are Amazon affiliate links.*











Categories: [Lifestyle Optimizations]({{< relref "/" >}}?Lifestyle-Optimizations=true)