# Life Philosophy and Goals

My life consists of my habits and environment, as well as my accumulated
internal mental state (believes, abilties, memories).  I strive to shape these
factors such that I feel fulfilled and am satisfied with my life trajectory.
Aspects of life that make up these factors interact in a [web of cause and
effect](https://wiki.earlyretirementextreme.com/wiki/What_is_ERE%3F), and play
off each other in complex, non-isolated ways.  Here, I try to describe how I
personally manage these factors to hopefully improve the lives of others that
stumble across this description.

This page contains short descriptions of various habits and environmental
choices and their relationships.  Deeper dives into some factors can be found
via links within each factor.

TODO organize this data as described at
https://www.reddit.com/r/Clojure/comments/tp4ixp/grouping_data_by_different_attributes_on_a_page/


{{< experience_aggregator >}}
My Experience (details about this experience)
 - Mood 1 (details about this mood)
 - Mood 2
{{< /experience_aggregator >}}

## Food

I eat a [mostly vegan diet](/docs/food.md) I [cook myself](/docs/cooking.md).
I [fast occasionally](/docs/fasting.md).

Web synergies:
 - Low cost.
 - Longer life.
 - More energy and therefore potential to create.
 - Enables [self-production of food](/docs/growing-own-food.md).

Web anti-synergies:
 - Leads to less social behavior, since this diet requires accommodating change
   by me or others when eating together.

## Money Management (Financial Accumulation)

I try to be frugal and spend around [~$12k per year](/docs/finances.md).  I
have around 1 years of expenses in a checking account through a local credit
union (BECU), and keep the rest of my savings in a Vanguard account in
broad-base index funds.

Web synergies:
 - Gives me greater access to serendipitous opportunities (making my life more
   [antifragile](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antifragile)).
 - Lowers stress associated with worrying about the future.
 - Gives me more potential for investing in good causes (e.g. donating to an
   impactful organization, or starting one!)

Web anti-synergies:
 - Leads to short term stress when an event threatens to increase spending,
   upsetting the equilibrium.

## Work at Google

I work as a software engineer at Google on internal performance testing
tooling.

Web synergies:
 - Helps me accumulate financial resources.
 - Trains my ability to learn.
 - Trains my understanding of teamwork and team dynamics.
 - Improves my ability to get computers do to useful things.

Web anti-synergies:
 - Large time sink, reducing ability to work on wider variety of projects.
 - Requires attention even when I don't feel engaged, leading to frustration or
   other negative emotions.

## Living Location

I live in Seattle, near the University of Washington (UW).

Web synergies:
 - Walking distance to grocery stores, making my food habit sustainable.
 - Enables biking to meet most obligations/errands/habits.

Web anti-synergies:
 - Living expenses are much higher than in non-urban locations.

## Biking for Personal Transportation

I do not own a car.  I bike or walk to enable all my habits, and use public
transit or rideshare for one-off journeys.

Web synergies:
 - Built-in exercise, with all its benefits.
 - Saves money/time required to manage car ownership.
 - Provides time to spend listing to interesting podcasts.

Web anti-synergies:
 - Takes more time than driving that could be put towards other things.
 - Activities outside of core habits become logistically harder, and sometimes
   don't happen because of this.  For instance climbing outside or going to
   events.

## Climbing

During non-pandemic times, I climb (mostly longer routes with a rope) in a gym
2-3 days a week.  I try to climb outside as much as I can, which ends up to be
maybe 5-10 times a year.

Web synergies:
 - Extremely empowering and engaging.
 - Helps me meet new people.
 - Provides clear, achievable goals that lead to sustainable positive feelings.

Web anti-synergies:
 - Can be time consuming.
 - Potential for injury that could seriously disrupt web.

## Reddit

I browse Reddit on my phone when I feel bored, unmotivated, or unfocused.  Some
of my favorite subreddits include:
 - r/AnimalsBeingDerps
 - r/DataIsBeautiful
 - (subreddit for whatever video game I'm current playing actively)
 - 

Web synergies:
 - Provides me with interesting things to share with my girlfriend or
   friends/family.
 - Helps me discover new ideas and keep up to date.

Web anti-synergies:
 - Can be a large time sink.
 - Stifles the [personal creativity that comes from being
   bored](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LKPwKFigF8U&vl=pt) (This is a pretty
   big effect for me personally).
 - Can fragment my focus - add new ideas to my mind that make me drop other
   ideas before I fully execute on them.

## YouTube

I watch various YouTubers while I eat or when I notice an interesting video.  I
frequently watch
[NorthernLion](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC3tNpTOHsTnkmbwztCs30sA) when
eating or chilling out almost as an interesting conversation substitute.  I
more actively watch [Veritasium](https://www.youtube.com/user/1veritasium),
[CGP Grey](https://www.youtube.com/user/CGPGrey),
[Kurzgesagt](https://www.youtube.com/user/Kurzgesagt), and other educational
channels when I see new videos from them.

Web synergies:
 - Helps me discover new ideas, or better understand new concepts.
 - Helps me relax.

Web anti-synergies:
 - Similar to Reddit.

## Hacker News

When I don't know what to do next (or feel bored/unmotivated), I browse [hacker
news](https://news.ycombinator.com/).

Web synergies:
 - Helps me discover new ideas.
 - Gives me a sense of what the tech startup world is like and informs me about
   that culture.

Web anti-synergies:
 - Very similar to Reddit.

## Music

## Reading

## Podcasts

## Gaming

## Exercise

## Social
