# Solving Societal Problems

Here I'm defining a "societal problem" as a large problem facing many people
that could be solved if said people changed their behavior in some systematic
way. For example:

 - **Climate Change** could be solved if we all transitioned to using more
   renewable sources of energy.
 - The **Obesity Epidemic** could be solved if we all ate less food.

## Individual Change and Shaming

One common proposal I've heard for solving at least the above problems is using
a "grassroots" approach. This method would involve first changing your own
behavior such that the problem would be solved if everyone behaved like you,
then trying to influence others to adopt your new behavior(s). This seems
simple enough, but I don't think it's the best way forward, and in some ways is
actively harmful.

The tacit assumption with this proposal is that people are able to choose what
behaviors to adopt. I would argue that in fact our behaviors are much more
influenced by our environment than we would like to admit. One component of our
environment is indeed other people peer pressuring us, but (IMO) far more
dominant factors include:

 - Economics (how much the behavior change costs)
 - "At hand"-ness (what other behaviors are "at hand" and easy to do)

When these factors are overpowering (which I argue they usually are), peer
pressure becomes a form of bullying and social rejection that the target of
which is powerless to stop. Perpetuating this is downright cruel.

## Changing the Environment

If a grassroots behavior change movement isn't the best way to solve the
problem, then what can we do instead?  In my opinion, the answer is
environmental change. This can take two primary forms:

### 1. Local Environmental Change

This involves making changes to an individual's local environment (the spaces
they interact with on a habitual basis) to guide them to certain behaviors.
Some examples would be intentionally not buying unhealthy food when at the
grocery store so that when at home these foods are not "at hand". Or not buying
a car so that you instead need to bike or bus to get around.

Note that the line here can be pretty blurry between what is an actual behavior
change and what is simply an action that changes one's environment. Because of
this, I think the stronger, ultimate solution is:

### 2. Policy-Level Environmental Change

Government policies can create massive environmental changes. For example,
extra taxes on certain products can massively impact people's buying decisions.
Or bans of certain products can completely change the suite of chemicals that
individuals are exposed to on a daily basis.

A natural objection is to point out that in a democracy, the majority of people
(in theory) choose what policies are enacted. Because of this, wouldn't people
just vote for policies that help them perpetuate their current behavior set -
which they presumably "chose" and/or otherwise would like to keep?

I argue that actually **people are quite able to vote in a way counter to their
everyday actions**. For instance, people who enjoy soda may vote for a
sugar-sweetened beverage tax. The reason why (I think) this is because the
mental state you adopt when voting is generally different that the mental state
when deciding - or not consciously deciding at all - to engage in a particular
behavior.

This is especially true when voting on higher level, more abstract policies.
For instance, banning a certain type of energy production might indirectly
increase someone's cost of living by quite a bit in various ways, but thinking
about the policy in a more abstract sense may lead someone to approve it
despite this personal impact.

This, like many solutions to big problems, does depend on an educated populace
that is able to reason about the effects of certain policies. Ensuring this
condition is itself a large scale societal problem that hopefully can be solved
with this same line of thinking. I do admit there's a bit of a chicken-and-egg
problem here :/.

### 3. Cultural Environmental Change

Shifting cultural norms also can lead to massive change in individual behavior.
I don't really know the best way this can be leveraged without the "grassroots"
problem I mentioned above, but I thought it would be worth mentioning.

## Testing this Theory

Right now this line of thinking is just a plausible idea.  I would love to see
some evidence for this, but don't have any at hand right now to cite.  So (as
always) I might be totally wrong :).
