# Achieving Utopia

## Humanities Superpower

People have the uniquely powerful ability to come up with arbitrary
explanations for how stuff works and then critically compare them against each
other. This creative process has led to all major advances in human history,
and is responsible for the accelerating rate of progress we all enjoy today.
This progress is in turn responsible for alleviating a tremendous amount of
suffering, and for creating a myriad of new ways for people to feel happy,
satisfied, or otherwise good.  It also has enabled people to automate many time
and energy consuming tasks that have historically either directly caused
suffering, or gotten in the way of further progress and/or doing things that
feel good.

Creative thought as I've defined it is the most important tool we have to
improve our state as a species (and to continue avoiding existential threats).
Therefore, we should be primarily orienting our society to encourage creative
thought and reduce the amount of time required to engage in non-creative work
to keep things running. If we can successfully do this, then we will maximize
our ability to solve all other hard problems facing our species, such as
resource shortages, aging, climate change, and successfully governing
ourselves. Additionally, arguably people will lead more fulfilling lives, as
more of their time will be spent thinking about interesting things and sharing
those thoughts as opposed to grinding away at Sisyphean maintenance tasks.

How can we do this?

## Basic Need Automation

We need to ensure that every person on earth has their basic (food, shelter,
medicine, mental health) needs met through automation. Worrying about basic
needs is probably the biggest distraction away from creative thought that
exists today.

A simple solution to this would be to supply everyone with a nanofabricator
that can produce food, tools, and everything else required to survive.
Unfortunately, currently this solution is still science fiction, and we instead
must rely on large shared systems that utilize economies of scale to provide
needs at a minimum cost. Distributing resources in these systems is hard, and
our growing wealth inequality today is evidence that we are doing a poor job.
Solving this problem via some kind of universal basic income seems at least
worth trying.

## Freedom of Information and Education

It's hard to think creatively when you have no prior ideas to remix together
into new ones. Making information and educational resources universally
accessible and engaging is crucial to spark creativity. To do this we should
continue encouraging the growth of the internet, and the growth of free and
open publication of scientific discovery (and thoughts in general). People who
write down novel ideas should have their needs covered by the automation
described above, and therefore will not need to worry about how to monetize
their work (which wastes everyone's time and energy, and cuts people out of the
creative process).


## Freedom of Direction

In the book "Greatness Cannot be Planned: The Myth of the Objective", the
authors argue that all hard problems suffer from deceptive paths to their
solutions. Therefore, attempting to grade or judge performance by comparing a
current state to a specific goal is misleading. This focus on objective
thinking is particularly dangerous when applied to people - using objectives to
encourage someone to do X or Y stifles that persons ability to exercise their
most powerful tool: their creativity. Instead, that person will just act in
accordance with the given objective, even if they have novel ideas they would
otherwise try to pursue.

To approach utopia, it makes sense to try to constrain the behavior of
individuals as little as possible so that the most novel ideas can be explored.
One way this could be conceptualized is by encouraging
[flaneur](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fl%C3%A2neur)-like behavior as
described in "Antifragile" by NN Taleb. This has the additional side benefit of
giving people space, time, and therefore ability to support the ideas of others
that they discover and think are important.


## Influences

This is heavily inspired by
[The Beginning of
Infinity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Beginning_of_Infinity) by David
Deutsch.
