# Fasting

## Fasting Mimicking Diet - January 2020

I started getting interested in fasting after reading [The Longevity Diet by
Valter Longo](https://www.valterlongo.com/the-longevity-diet/).  Based on the
information in the book, it seemed like fasting provided some easily attainable
health benefits, if making it a habit wasn't too disruptive to my life.  My
first experiment happened shortly after reading the book.  I attempted a
DIY-Fasting Mimicking Diet (FMD) as described in the book for 5 days.

I used [eatthismuch](https://www.eatthismuch.com/) to pre-plan my meals for the
FMD.  I think it would have been much harder for me to adhere to the diet if I
did not do this.  Here is what I ate:

![DIY-FMD-1](/docs/DIY-FMD-1.png)
![DIY-FMD-2](/docs/DIY-FMD-2.png)

If my memory serves me well, I remember feeling quite good during my fast,
which some minor headaches on day 2-3.  I did this during my vacation from
work, and I don't remember working intensely on any particular project during
this time, so I wouldn't consider this a "stress test" of the diet.


## Water Only Fast - December 2020

Further exposure to fasting proponents, especially Peter Attia (via e.g. [his
podcast with Eileen White](https://peterattiamd.com/eileenwhite/), made me
think about the simpler prospect of doing a water only fast.  I finally
attempted this during a work week in December 2020.  My schedule looked like:

 - Tuesday:
   - Large Spinach, Tomato, Olive Oil, Vinegar, Italian Seasoning Salad for lunch
   - Some walnuts for dinner
 - Wednesday:
   - Only water
 - Thursday:
   - 4ish servings of Better Than Bouillion stock concentrate (in water) +
     steak seasoning
 - Friday:
   - 4ish servings of Better Than Bouillion stock concentrate + potassium
     containing spice mix

Here are the stock ingredients I used:

![stock-front](/docs/stock-front.jpg)
![stock-back](/docs/stock-back.jpg)

I felt surprisingly normal during my fast.  Especially when exercising - I went
on my normal ~3 mile run on Thursday with 25 * 2 sets of push ups and 10 * 3
sets of pull ups interspersed and felt actually **better** than I normally do.
Perhaps this was because of the water/glycogen weight I lost at the start of
the fast (~5 lbs, 190lbs -> 185lbs).

There were times when I felt a bit lightheaded also during the fast, but never
too seriously.  This may have been a bit psychological, since I knew I was
fasting.

One thing I also noticed was it was even harder than normal for me to keep warm
in my ~65F apartment, especially when sleeping.  The Wed-Thurs night I did not
sleep very well because of this.  Any kind of draft under the blankets was very
noticeable and interrupted my sleep.  I think wearing long underwear or other
pajamas of some kind would have helped (usually I sleep close to naked).  

I did notice some tingling in my arms/legs, especially when putting a acute
force on them.  For instance, when doing push-ups, my hands would start
tingling.  And when putting my ankle on my knee when sitting, it would tingle
strongly.  Apparently, [this is
expected](https://www.theartofketo.com/tag/tingling-while-fasting/).

One thing that I also definitely noticed during my fast was a shift in my
brain activity.  I felt much more "on" than usual - I had a consistant motivation
to be busy in one way or another.  However, I also felt a bit more impaitient.
If a task I was busy doing started to stall, I would eagerly try to shift to
another task, or even multitask.  This was good for gettings lots done, but not
as helpful for cracking a difficult problem (e.g. debugging a computer program)
I could use this feature of fasting in the future if I need to be particularly
productive in this way.
