# Sprints, and Taking Breaks

Working on mentally hard tasks depletes mental energy reserves in a localized
way, similarly to how physically hard tasks deplete muscle energy reserves
[CITATION NEEDED beyond own experience].  Therefore, feeling stressed or guilty
about not being able to continue focusing on a task is counterproductive - use
of willpower to keep focused is a patch solution that many times actually
depletes even more mental energy.  A better solution is to move to another
location and take a break by zoning out or otherwise doing nothing.  Switching
tasks I find sometimes also can help with this - perhaps different types of
tasks exercise different mental energy reserves.  

The Pomodoro method uses the idea of "sprints" or "bursts" of mental effort,
followed by short breaks, usually in a 25m on, 5m off cadence.  In my
experience, it's not worth interrupting a flow state with 25m timers - using
this as a guideline generally works better for me.


# Distraction and Friction

Working in the presence of distractions or other environmental factors that
make work require more effort can actually boost productivity to a certain
extent.  I find that more difficult or "stressful" problems can more fully
engage me, leading to a personal response than more than compensates for the
increased difficulty.  Listening to energetic music, or working with others
around are good examples of this.  Standing desks might also have a similar
effect.  People who watch TV/videos/streams when working may also be tapping
into this effect.

See the book "Antifragile" for more on this, specifically Book 1 Chapter 2.


# Food

Personally, eating - especially being full - can derail my ability to be in a
productive, flow state.  Given this, I try to adhere to this eating schedule to
minimize the time I spend full when I want to be productive:

 - Meal 1: After waking up and completing one work "sprint".
 - Meal 2: After finishing work and completing one personal "sprint".

For both cases, I should delay the meal as long as I don't feel hungry, and
even delay a bit if I do feel hungry, to take advantage of the productivity
boost that comes when anticipating food (see "Distraction and Friction").

My first meal should mostly be fatty/with complex carbs.  Eating a
high-refined-carb (bread/sugar) meal will likely start a "snack train" that
will make it very hard to focus.

# Motivation

See https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/we-learn-faster-when-we-arent-told-what-choices-to-make/
