# Motivation

NOTE This is a random theory of mine; don't put too much stock into it!

Motivation to do something requires that the "something" is **attainable**
and **meaningful** (has a point/purpose).  

## (Perceived) Attainability

Objectives that are *perceived* - which is really all that matters with respect
to motivation - to be attainable have a trivially easy to accomplish next step
on the path toward them.  

What makes a next step trivially easy?  If your body/mind are primed to do the
task such that you could do it with minimal/no conscious intervention.  For
example walking, reading, or doing some trained skill are trivially easy.  Note
that this depends on the current state of your body; walking may not be
trivially easy if you are exhausted or have a broken leg.  And also the state
of your mind; responding to a conversation may be hard if you haven't caught up
on what has been said.

Note that the whole path to the objective does not have to be trivially easy or
even known.  All that matters where motivation is concerned is the next step
(at least for attainability).

Motivation can flag when the next step towards a goal is unclear.  In such
situations it's easy to simply switch gears to another activity which has clear
steps - this is procrastination.

## (Perceived) Meaning

Activities are meaningful when they fit neatly into a larger narrative.  This
could be a grand narrative about one's identity (e.g. defined by what [virtues
you aspire to or possess](https://www.viacharacter.org/character-strengths)),
or a myopic narrative about what puzzle piece should fit next into the puzzle
to bring it closer to solution.

What you or others may find meaningful in a certain situation varies a lot for
many reasons.  I have found myself obsessed with completing certain goals, and
then having my obsession and motivation completely evaporate after reframing
the larger context those goals fit into.  

One way to lose motivation for a task is to follow the meaning of the task up
through all the ways it impacts the world, coming to the final conclusion that
there is no greater meaning in the world (or you don't know what it is), and
therefore the task itself is meaningless.  This kind of "bubbling up" can
happen on a smaller scale as well.

