# Potential Life Missions

Finding a way to use my time and resources to make the world a better place is
a goal of mine.  Here are some roads I could pursue to do that.

## Empowering People

I currently believe that creative people are the solution to the current
problems facing humanity, and all future problems as well.  See [_Utopia_]({{<
relref "/docs/understanding-the-world/utopia.md" >}}) for more details. Given
this, a high leverage way to make a world a better place is to make it easier
for people to do their thing.

### Problem Accessibility

Lots of big problems today are difficult for the average person to just dive
into. If we could make it so that the average person could effectively use
their spare time to work on these big problems, and built a culture encouraging
this, we could unlock a lot of latent creative power.

Ways to do this include:

#### Advertising Next Steps

Making more non-fiction content with a "current state of things" or "next
steps" section that encourages individuals to experiment with the frontier.

#### Giving People Time

Giving people more time to dig into problems, e.g. with UBI.

#### Building a Problem-Accessible Culture

Building open (free to participate in) communities around societal issues.

#### Education

I think that having students in schools spend more time actually trying to
tackle real problems, as opposed to working on contrived assignments might help
empower more people.  IMO school in general is too focused on giving students a
strong base of pre-requisite knowledge. Many people (myself included) hold the
sentiment that the most important thing they learned in school is "learning how
to learn", since much of the actual content they learned is not directly
relevant to the problems they are trying to solve. Despite this, they are still
by and large effectively solving those problems that they were not schooled to
do.  I think this is because people have a strong ability to pick up
pre-requisites quickly when it is obvious why they need to know them given the
problem at hand.

Therefore, if we made school either much shorter, or gave students real
problems to work on in a low-risk environment, this may lead to good outcomes.

### Optimism

I currently believe that optimism encourages action.  Therefore, fostering
optimism is a good way to empower people to try to solve big problems.

### Physical/Mental Health

Sick people have a reduced capacity to solve problems.  Working on eliminating
the largest causes of sickness would therefore help empower people.

#### Aging

The largest cause of sickness in the world today by far.

Also an extreme humanitarian tragedy that dwarfs all others.










Categories: 

Backlinks: 