# "System 1" Chatbot

A chatbot that simulates talking to the "system 1" part of the brain only as
described in "Thinking, Fast and Slow".

# Water Saving Toilet

Make a toilet where urine is redirected (like a composting toilet) into a
separate area with no water in it (the back of the toilet still has water).
Then, when you pee in that area you don't need to flush, but when you poop (or
otherwise flush), the rising water will drain into the pee area as well,
washing it.  This should reduce the number of flushes per day by a lot for the
average toilet.  


# Album Cover Quiz Site

Given an album cover (or movie cover or book cover), try to guess its genre or
other thinks about it.  Basically [this](http://playjudgey.com/).  


# Bell Pepper Cup

Cut the top off of a bell pepper and use it as a cup.  


# Laser Cut Flip Book

## Main Idea

Create a flip book by laser engraving a stack of thin wood (or thick paper)
pieces, each with one frame of a gif or short video.  Then, create a box that
the stack can fit into snugly, with one of the walls perpendicular to the stack
removed.  In the place of that wall, put a mobile rod (or just make the wall
removable).  If you then turn the box so that the rod or movable wall is facing
the ground, you can remove the wall and let the pieces fall downward, advancing
the frame and animating the gif/video.

## Variation

Make the stack of frames, then drill a hole in one corner and thread a rod
through the stack.  You should be able to then rotate the stack around like a
spiral staircase.  Maybe you can animate it like this?


# Money Conversion App/Site

An app that allows the user to compare current market values of different
things.  For example, avocados to dollars or hours of specific work to rocks
etc.  Would be cool to have a web page associated that points out interesting
comparisons.  


# String Image Formatter

## Basic Idea

Write a program that takes in a string and an image file, then adds
newlines/spaces/formatting to the string so that it looks like the image when
viewed from a distance.  If the string is too short to work, repeat it or
somehow compress the image so it works out perfectly.  



# Synonym Finder

A program (or text editor plugin) where you can search text using all synonyms
of the words you typed to search.  For example, searching some documentation for
"log" would search for the word "log", but also (and with lower priority) the
words "stderr", "stdout", "output", etc.  This could also just be build in to
the search bar, where a window would pop up containing reframings of what you
searched for, as suggestions for what else to try.  


# Table Fountain

If you have a round table to eat at that seats ~4 people, put a symmetrical
fountain like those found in gardens in the middle for people to use to refill
their water cups.  Could have four streams for easier filling.  


# See Through Walls with VR/AR

## Basic Idea

Try to (using google maps or pre-collected data) model an object in the real
world at its exact real world position in a VR or AR simulation.  For example,
model a toothbrush in a bathroom so that when using VR in the living room you
can "see through walls" to see exactly the toothbrush.  Could be used to show
large objects around the world at their exact positions (like the Eiffel tower
or Mt Everest).  This would have a cool effect of giving you a really good
bearing on your location with respect to the rest of the world.  
