I think the big problem we have is that we do not have enough shared
projects/interests.  I have too many things that I'm interested in that are
completely independent.  To solve this we need to do more things together that
we are BOTH really into.  Really groundbreaking i know.



### Collaboration

One source is collaborating on a shared problem.  This could be a
teacher/student relationship where one person is helping another solve a
problem they know the solution to.  This could also be a more peer-to-peer
relationship where two people are collaborating on a problem together.

A-ha moments when one person can help another spread positivity and
connection.

Requires a problem both parties have stake in solving.

E.g. puzzles, cooking, 


### Shared Emotion

Another source is a shared experience that sparks certain emotions.  In this
case, if both people are super engaged in the experience, it's easy to relate
seeing the other person experience the same intense emotion as you.  

Requires an experience both parties are very engaged in.

E.g. movies, shows, spectator-like-events


### Asymmetry

I worry that asymmetric events that one party participates in for the others
enjoyment can lead to resentment.  

This is especially true if one party puts in a lot of effort into something the
other party doesn't appreciate to the first person's expectation.


Gifts as "thank you" exchanges sidestep this problem, since the expectation is
that the gift makes the two parties whole.  This doesn't quite make sense yet.



### My values

I highly value long term fulfillment and permanent solving of day to day
problems.  I do not think transient emotions are important to manage, unless
they become recurring problems.  I think the way to be happy and fulfilled is
to resolve things that cause negative emotions so that they do not happen
again.

Being able to permanently resolve the problems of another (e.g. through
teaching them a new skill or fixing a thing they use that is broken) brings me
immense satisfaction.

I think entertaining someone in an asymmetric way is not fulfilling if their
emotional state is simply reset later.  



### Caring/Emphatizing

I have a hard time emphathizing with feelings that don't have basis in a
problem that was attempted to be solved.  If the person is not trying to solve
the problem that is causing them pain, then why should I also feel said pain
when we could just get rid of it entirely?  Pain is bad.
