# My Values

I aspire to be a vigorous, wise person that is capable of intentionally
crafting and living a consistently fulfilling life.  A fulfilling life contains
met goals, is interesting, is free of disempowerment, includes meaningful
relationships, and has the potential to inspire and empower others.

## Vigor

Energy to achieve goals in my experience comes from two main sources:

**Physical Health**: [Exercise]({{< relref "/docs/exercise.md" >}}),
[sleep]({{< relref "/docs/sleep.md" >}}), [food]({{< relref
"/docs/eating/food.md" >}}), [cronic stress]({{< relref
"/docs/cronic-stress.md" >}}) and other environmental influences all effect
personal vigor in complex and inter-dependant ways.  Spending time untangling
this web of interactions for oneself is a worthy endeavor that has personally
helped me feel more consistently energetic.  Also a deeper understanding of
these interactions will probably make you live longer!

**Vision**: Vision is a clear path for how to achieve the goal in question, or
at least for how to get closer to achieving said goal.  Acquiring vision can be
tricky and fickle.  For me, it helps to:

 - Somewhat aimlessly learn about the area of knowledge the goal is in by
   reading what other people have written/said about it.  Sometimes reading
   about even completely unrelated topics can spark ideas about the original
   goal.
 - Plant "seeds" in my head relating to the goal.  These usually manifest as
   questions I'm curious to know the answers to, or very rough theories that I
   can't even put into words for how the goals might be achieved.
 - Sleep on my knowledge to find new connections and/or grow the seeds (see
   [Hammock Driven Development](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f84n5oFoZBc)).
 - Do cardiovascular exercise like hiking or running to find new connections
   and/or help grow the seeds.  Not sure how this helps (more blood flow to the
   brain?), but it usually does for me.
 - Take a long break from the goal and work on another goal.  Having multiple
   in-flight projects at onces makes the natural.

## Wisdom

Wisdom to me means a relative lack of surprise with the behavior of the world
around oneself.  By this definition, to become wise is to build an effective
model of the world in one's head that can predict what will happen
consistently, thus avoiding surprise.  Because the world is often
unpredictable, wisdom also means not expecting things of the world that cannot
be expected.  For example, there are many catastrophes that could happen at any
moment, causing severe damage to one's life - handling these with grace as
opposed to feeling the negative emotions that come with unmet expectations is
perhaps wise.

This is discussed in a lot more detail by [Stoic
philosophers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stoicism).  My reading of this work
is that the universe behaves logically and the better one understands this
universal reason (logos), the more in harmony with the universe one will be.

Wisdom also means recognizing that attaining accurate knowledge is often
painstaking work, and therefore to be wise is to be patient with learning and
not try to take shortcuts when understanding the truth is important.  See [What
to believe]({{< relref "/docs/what-to-believe.md" >}}) for discussion of this.

Wisdom goes hand-in-hand with well-roundedness.

## Well-Roundedness

Having a wide range of capabilities has several strong benefits:

 - It reduces single points of failure in life (e.g. injuries or big life
   changes leaving one without a purpose/focus).
 - It makes moments where the world is negatively effecting one in a way which
   they are powerless to stop rarer, since it is more likely one will have the
   skills necessary to redirect or counter the negative effect.
 - It makes you more socially interesting to a wider range of different people.
   People find capability in specific areas interesting, so more capability in
   more areas should make you more interesting to more people.
 - It allows one to notice and act on more opportunities in life, since most
   require some knowledge in their area to detect and exploit. I think it's
   reasonable to say that ones ability to discover and make the most of
   opportunities has massive impact on the trajectory of ones life.
 - It hastens learning of new skills and concepts, which often have
   similarities to other skills/concepts.  The more you have command of, the
   more likely it is that there will be commonalities between the new
   skill/concept and one you already know. Also, it can help build abstract
   mental concepts by consciously identifying these commonalities and storing
   them as a new abstract concept.
 - It enables formation of novel ideas, which are often just ideas from one
   discipline applied to another.

One way to describe this value is as an aspiration to being a ["Renaissance
man"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polymath) (See
[ERE](https://wiki.earlyretirementextreme.com/wiki/What_is_ERE%3F) for more
discussion of this.

Becoming more well rounded can be achieved by taking on more personal
responsibility for life issues.  At the highest level, this involves
determining personal values and then creating and owning life goals in line
with those values.  At a more mechanical level, this involves seeing roadblocks
in life as opportunities for growth. Energetically tackling these roadblocks
and learning the bests ways to get around them should improve one's breath of
knowledge, making similar issues one might encounter later easier to navigate.

The "I can do this" or "I can learn how to do this" sentiment when faced with
any issue should lead to an increase in well-roundedness over time.

Some areas of knowledge to consider personally deeply understanding to become
more well rounded + tasks to try:

 - Repair/construction of objects you depend on - try fixing your
   computer/cloths/furniture/bike/car/house.
 - Investing savings - try researching, creating, and executing a personal
   investment plan yourself.
 - Food production - try growing/cooking your own food.
