# Food Goals

1. Delay chronic diseases as long as possible.  Described well in [this talk by
   Peter Attia](https://vimeo.com/228845024).  The
   [big ones](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/leading-causes-of-death.htm) are:
   1. Cardiovascular disease.
   1. Cancer.
   1. Neurodegenerative disease.
   1. Diabetes/Metabolic Syndrome.
1. Maintain sustained energy levels as much as possible, avoiding:
   1. Periods of low motivation.
   1. "Food coma-ing".
   1. "Snack train-ing", or continuous distraction by a desire to eat more.

# What should I eat and when?

The most convincing diet structure I've found has been [The Longevity Diet by
Valter Longo](https://www.valterlongo.com/daily-longevity-diet-for-adults/).
This diet is mostly vegan, with fish 2-3 times per week, keeping [protein intake
low](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3988204/).  [This
podcast](https://podcasts.google.com/feed/aHR0cDovL21hcmtiZWxsc3Bvd2VycHJvamVjdC5saWJzeW4uY29tL3Jzcw/episode/MWZmYTNmZDQtNzFjYS00ZjFhLTg4M2YtMjJlZjNhNWFkZjRj?hl=en&ved=2ahUKEwj-nLjVwKfwAhVzCjQIHY2XA70QjrkEegQICBAF&ep=6) has
a compelling dissent of Longo's thoughts here; basically it states that Longo's
ideas makes sense, but so do many other ideas and we know now that insufficient
protein can be unhealthy (I need to dig more into this) - the evidence to lower
intake in spite of this is not strong enough yet.  Note that personalizing
protein intake levels while optimizing longevity seems to be possible by
[measuring Blood Urea Nitrogen levels as described by Michael
Lustgarten](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u654YTubFRM).

Cool paper about food group epidemiology:
https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article/105/6/1462/4569801.

There are a couple of amendments I've made based on my personal experience (in
service of goal 2 above).  These include:

 1. Not eating breakfast.  I find myself most productive in a fasted state
    (even a [prolonged fast](/docs/eating/fasting.md), and eating breakfast breaks be
    right out of this in what otherwise would be a very productive time.  
      - This is counter to Longo's suggestions, some other research on
        circadian rhythms by [Sachin
        Panda](https://doi.org/10.1177/0748730419892105), and the [American
        Heart
        Association](https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000476).
        The arguments here often revolve around weight loss (which I don't have
        a problem with yet), and don't seem too strong to me.
      - This does help keep a shorter eating window on my day which
        is widely recommended:
          - [Sachin Panda](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.2019.11.004)
 1. Trying to eat grains and/or starchy foods later in the day.  These foods
    uniquely mess with my energy levels.  I'm eager to get some Continuous
    Glucose Monitoring (CGM) data to see if I can quantitate this.  

Some interesting thoughts on meal timing for energy levels can be found at
https://www.workingagainstgravity.com/guides/nutrition-guide/meal-timing.

Other tenants I try to live by:

1. Eating whole foods as much as possible.

## My Current Food Strategy

### Things I try to avoid

 - Dairy
 - Meat
 - Refined carbs (e.g. flour containing foods)
    - [Danger of Fast Carbs](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/03/carbs-are-killing-us/609040/)
 - Sugars/Syrups


In practice I may have small amounts (<1 "serving") of these things about once
a week.

Note also that avoiding animals products is partially for health reasons
(avoiding cancer primarily), but also partially because the animal food
industry is not easy for me to support.


### Things I try to moderate

 - Eating more than 1/2 cup of (dry volume) beans or grains at once. A large amount of
   my calories come from these foods - I've just noticed that eating a lot in one
   sitting saps my energy, I assume because they take work to digest.

## One Meal A Day (OMAD)

I tried this for a while, and I found myself falling into the recurring pattern
of overeating because "this is all the food I'll eat today". This is especially
bad with lots of low-calorie-density, high-fiber foods (which I want to eat no
matter what). The overeating would make me feel unfocused and uncomfortable for
4+ hours, which is not worth it for me.

Recently, I've found that a better thought pattern for me is to say "I'll eat
that later" when I get a craving for something right after a meal. This avoids
a state of overeating, and I may later end up not craving that thing, which
means I'll eat less overall that day (which is generally good).

# Hunger, and Physical States of Being

One thing I've noticed is that my body can be in different "states" that affect
my hunger levels. Some examples:

 - When sitting around for a while (not moving), I tend to want food.
 - When eating some food (e.g. a snack sized meal), I tend to want food.
 - A couple hours after  overeating, my body enters a low energy state where it
   seems to just want to eat more food since other tasks seem harder to do.
 - When exercising (and afterward), I tend to not want food.
 - When being busy with many straightforward tasks, I tend to not want food.
 - When working on something hard that isn't going well, but doesn't have a
   time pressure, I tend to want food as a distraction.
 - When interacting with other people, I tend to not want food.

One theory I have is that my body gets hungry when it notices that (1) there is
food around and (2) I have time/space to digest after I eat (I wont need to
immediately do something that requires lots of energy).

Some habits that take advantage of this concept include:

 - Distracting myself with busywork when I feed hungry but don't (consciously)
   want to eat.
 - Eating one meal a day, so that I don't have a "snack-train" problem of
   having future meals induce hunger.

## "Snack Train"-ing

One pattern I've noticed in myself that eating food will put me in a
lower-focus mood for 1-4 hours depending on how much and what I ate. If I try
to do something that requires focus in this mood, my body will resist me and
often want to eat more food instead as an alternative activity. Unfortunately,
eating more food will just perpetuate the cycle; in fact it will become even
harder to focus as more of my energy needs to go to digestion.

The key here is to break the cycle by somehow riding through the low energy
mood without pushing myself so much that I want to eat. Sometimes this is
really hard, because doing things that require focus is fulfilling :(. 

I'm basically just writing this as a reminder to myself to push through when
I'm in this mood for the sake of my future self!

# Fasting

One of the big takeaways I've gotten from my readings so far is that spending a
good amount of time in a "fasted" or food deprived state is good for many
reasons.  I therefore try to eat when I'm hungry (not bored) within a shorter
period of the day.  I've also [had good success with prolonged
fasting](/docs/eating/fasting.md).


# Measuring Personal Dietary Effects

Ideally, I would measure the effects of different foods on my personal health
directly so that I know what works for me (as opposed to what should work
generally).  This takes work unfortunately.  Here are some options that I
should probably explore at some point:

 - [Viome microbiome testing](https://www.viome.com/products/gut-intelligence)
 - [Regular blood testing w/Morgan Levine's biological age
   calculation](https://biohackstack.com/posts/levines-phenotypic-age/).  See
   also [Aging.ai](http://aging.ai/).


# What fats to eat?

Probably mostly mono- and poly-unsaturated fatty acids (not saturated fatty
acids).

 - https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.040331
 - https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.118.038908


# Protein

Cool table of calories per gram of protein:
https://www.healthyalyona.com/nutrition/plant-based-protein-lowest-calories/


# Organic?

I haven't found strong evidence that organic food is healthier than non
organic. But it could be that the right studies just haven't been done yet.
Here is an interesting review:

 - https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5658984/


# Specific Food Notes

## Processed Meat

[Carcinogenic according to the
WHO](https://www.iarc.who.int/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/pr240_E.pdf). I don't
eat this.

## Advanced Glycation End Products

Created by high heat cooking of especially protein-rich foods (e.g. meat/nuts).
But all foods contain.  Ideal to reduce the amount of this eaten.

 - [Michael Lustgarten evidence
   video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8gKFWBTpXWE)
 - Great overview/reference: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3704564/

It would be cool to measure this in blood.  Perhaps a1c inflammation test is a
good proxy.

These are also formed endogenously when sugars react with proteins/fats
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_glycation_end-product). This may be one
of the reasons why sugar is bad for you.

## Flax Seeds

It seems like baking flax seeds will not degrade omega-3 content ([biased
source](https://www.goldenvalleyflax.com/flax-facts/health-research-articles/flaxseed-storage-baking-stability/)).

## Nutritional Yeast

Contains MSG ([probably not
harmful](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6952072/)) and uric acid
([probably harmful in large quantity](https://peterattiamd.com/rickjohnson/))
([source](https://selfhacked.com/blog/nutritional-yeast/)).  Also is a fairly
processed food.


