# Influences

These works have guided by thinking about how to maintain good health for as
long as possible. They are roughly sorted by their level of influence on my
thinking.

## Kevin Bass

Excellent science advocate that fights hard to avoid believing good stories
that are not backed by evidence.  Some of his work that resonates most strongly
with me includes:

 - [Good measured discussion of the Keto diet (on the Healthcare Unfiltered podcast)](https://podcasts.google.com/feed/aHR0cHM6Ly9mZWVkcy5zb3VuZGNsb3VkLmNvbS91c2Vycy9zb3VuZGNsb3VkOnVzZXJzOjg4NzExODg2OC9zb3VuZHMucnNz/episode/dGFnOnNvdW5kY2xvdWQsMjAxMDp0cmFja3MvMTA3MzUxNDQ1MQ?ep=14).  Does a really good job here discussing keto movement context and how LDL cholesterol is treated by the movement.
 - [This tweet about how science in unnatural](https://twitter.com/kevinnbass/status/1409061791980793858).

## [The Longevity Diet by Valter Longo](https://www.valterlongo.com/daily-longevity-diet-for-adults/).

Good examination of fasting, as well as an overview of different ways to think
about how to determine which diet is the healthiest long term (Longo's "5
Pillars").

## [Lifespan by David Sinclair](https://lifespanbook.com/)

Cool review of a new theory of aging that seems promising to be.  Also does some
good review of longevity concepts.  This was my introduction to the field
(specifically a Joe Rogan Experience David Sinclair interview).  Be aware that
David Sinclair is pretty optimistic and eager to promote things that are not
100% solid yet (see Resveratrol).

## [Red Pen Reviews](https://www.redpenreviews.org/)

I haven't dug deeply into this website, but my skimming has found that it's a
pretty good way to determine which books to trust and which not to - a **very**
important task given the plethora of bad nutrition advice out there.

## [Michael Lustgarten's Diet](https://michaellustgarten.com/2019/11/10/12-16-years-younger-than-my-chronological-age-whats-my-diet/)

Michael Lustgarten is heroically tracking all the food he eats and doing
regular blood testing.  His diet, although very personalized, may be a good
starting point for a generally healthy diet.

## [In Defense of Food by Michael Pollan](https://michaelpollan.com/books/in-defense-of-food/)

I highly recommend this book!  The biggest takeaway I got from it is that our
tendency to break down foods and biology in general into atomic
nutrients/aspects and pretend that is all they are (for easier study) leads
often to bad models of reality.  Biological systems are highly interwoven and
the impact of stuff on them often depends on the greater context.  For example,
our body's ability to absorb certain nutrients depends on what those nutrients
are dissolved/complexed within.

## [The Good Gut](https://sonnenburglab.stanford.edu/press.html)

Great book about microbiome health.  Does a good job revealing what we do know
about the gut and how frighteningly little that is!  Unfortunately, due to how
little we know about the gut, there isn't a lot of super actionable advice
here, except eating lots of fiber or "Microbiota Accessible Carbohydrates"
("MACS") as they're referred to in the book.

## [The Queen of Fats by Susan Allport](http://www.susanallport.com/)

Really interesting read about the science of omega-3 fatty acids.  One of the
core thesis is that our western diet has a higher-than-historical ratio of
omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids, which causes problems.  This is because the
body can use these fats for the same purposes, but they have different
performances for those purposes.  For example,
[prostaglandins](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prostaglandin) can be made with
omega-3 or omega-6 fatty acids, but the omega-3 variants are less "strong" and
may contribute less to heart disease.

Does a really excellent job of telling the story of the scientists who
study/studied these fats, instead of just passing down diet rules without
context.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fatty_acid_ratio_in_food has some data about
omega-3/omega-6 ratios.

## [How Not to Die by Michael Gregor](https://nutritionfacts.org/book/how-not-to-die/)

This book is a good survey of diet from the "Whole Food Plant Based"
perspective.  Sometimes I think the author gets a bit over-zealous about how
his philosophy is the best and makes lazy, broad, strong statements that are
not adequately supported.  For instance, dismissing certain foods (like meat)
as obviously unhealthy without examining the counterpoints.

The author's web site [nutritionfacts.org](https://nutritionfacts.org/) is a
decent source of information, though it suffers from the same problems as the
book.

## [Genius Foods by Max Lugavere](https://www.maxlugavere.com/book)

This book takes a more brain focused approach to diet, which pushes it more
into the keto- space.  AFAIK, ketogenic diets are more linked to brain health
than other diets.  I think it falls into the same trap as Michael Gregor, but
not quite as badly.  It's a good intro to lots of cool food/health topics to
explore more independently.  

## Biohack Stack

Good place for ideas to experiment with.  Good example of an interesting profile:
https://biohackstack.com/posts/michael-lustgarten/.

## [Aging.ai](http://aging.ai/)

A cool system for quantifying biological age.  See also the
[young.ai](https://app.young.ai/app/dashboard) app developed by the same people
to make living better easier.  I don't use this system myself right now.

