# Climbing Safety Checklist

At time of writing, I recently finished reading [*The Checklist
Manifesto*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Checklist_Manifesto) by Atul
Gawande.  This book makes the strong point that human beings are not inherently
perfectly disciplined, and will inevitably cut corners when doing a task many
times.  This is especially true when the corners that are cut are usually not
important, even if sometimes they are crucially so.

Reading this made me think of the process of climbing, which has many such
steps.  So, in the interest of not skipping these steps myself, here is my
attempt at a *Manifesto* style checklist.  As in the book, I tried to make this
checklist as useful and evidence driven as possible.  I'm hoping to make it
short enough to be usable, yet not skipping any steps that commonly lead to
injuries/death.

Before writing the checklist, I wanted to get an idea of what mistakes most
commonly cause injuries when climbing.  According to [The epidemiology of
mountaineering and rock climbing
accidents](https://doi.org/10.1580/0953-9859-1.4.235), in Grand Teton National
Park from 1981 to 1986 these were:

 * Bad fall, usually on lead (34 cases).
 * Rock fall when climbing (11 cases).
 * Getting lost off route (6 cases).
 * Rappelling off the rope end (1 case).
 * Rappelling with a bad anchor (2 cases).
 * Not using proper protection (7 cases).
 * Not using a rope (4 cases)!
 * Not wearing a helmet (3 cases).

Most of the injuries discussed in the paper happened on show/ice, which I'm
ignoring for the purposes of this checklist.

Interestingly, most of these injuries occurred on the easiest routes (5.1-5.3!),
which is in line with most of the anecdotes in *The Checklist Manifesto*.

Another study, ["Rock climbing rescues in Boulder County, Colorado and Eldorado
Canyon State
Park"](https://www.wemjournal.org/article/S1080-6032(12)00109-3/fulltext), has
similar statistics. This study references [a similar Australian study](https://docs.google.com/viewerng/viewer?url=https://dokumen.tips/google-reader?url%3D1f38b04767057b7e61e6dc6a385532b059b9b5300a6f6922794715af97edb0c5608cd6855462c07b7ba9cea7b73d0370607ca69c30fd13c15abf5be6377add0d0l3DstEzNe1rGgKhO86Pa2B8IPxt6MgbB7vDfkU6/MsrdOoc4hxPjwR14utxof5RNCM++vnYL5Odac67f5xzvR2iiLMcwgP3Ulsaap3JrFaa6/vvh1ZZtnGJLHA9eH4nIknPKMtUfEBtFjzLPKxkRQ%3D%3D) with more interesting results.

Check [this cool data
visualization](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/nate.downer/viz/MostCommonAccidentCausebyState/Dashboard12)
using American Alpine Club data for another view into accident data. And [this
visualization](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/nate.downer/viz/CausesofRockClimbingAccidents/MyRiskFactors)
by the same author.

Here is the current checklist:

```
BEFORE CLIMBING:
 - Ensure harnesses are on correctly.
 - Ensure belay device is locked and through two harness hard points.
 - Ensure rope is tied through two harness hard points.
 - Ensure rope has stopper knot at non-climber end.
 - Determine if any extended slings will be needed to avoid rope running over
   rock.
 - Discuss rock fall hazard and what to do if it happens.

BEFORE RAPPELLING:
 - Ensure both ends of rope have stopper knots.
 - Weight rope while still using personal anchors.
```
